# 06.030 Math Methods

Reference: [Math API](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Math.html)

## Methods you should know

* abs
* ceil
* floor
* sqrt
* round
* pow
* log
* log10

## The `pow()` method

Pow takes two arguements.  It raises a base number to a power.

* $3^2$ would be `Math.pow(3,2)`
* $5^{-13}$ would be `Math.pow(5,-13)`
* $\pi{r^2}$ would be `Math.pow(Math.PI, 2);
* $5^{e}$ would be `Math.pow(5,Math.E)`
Note that for squares it is usually preferable to just multiply.  It is faster and minimizes rounding errors that can happen with logarithms.  Therefore it is probably better to write $\pi{r^2}$ as `Math.PI * r * r`

### Calculating nth roots with the `pow()` method.

There is a cube root function, `cbrt()`.  It isn't on the list of the That covers $\sqrt[2]{x}$.  The cbrt() method covers $\sqrt[3]{x}$.  But what about arbitrary bases like $\sqrt[n]{x}$?

The pow() function saves the day.  The value of $\sqrt[n]{x}$ May be expressed as `pow(x,1.0/n)`.  

In the expression `pow(x,1.0/n)` it is likely that n is an int.  Why is it important that  the formula uses 1.0 instead of 1.

## Trig functions

Trig is not a prerequisite for this course, so you do not need to know the Trig functions.  If you understand the trig functions, note that the arguments must be radians.

## Making integers

Notice that in the title I said "integers" and not "int."  Mathmatically speaking, all of the following are integers, but they are not always the Java data type `int`

### Casting

Casting something to `int` truncates the fractional part of a double or float and just returns the integer

* (int)1.9999999 returns 1
* (int)1.0000001 returns 1

### Math.floor() "rounds down"

The Math.floor() method is similar to casting to int.  It truncates the fractional part.  It is different than casting because the floor() method always returns a `double`.

### Math.ceil() "rounds up"

Like floor(), ceil() returns a double.  It effectively "rounds up."

### Math.round() 

Math.round() is kind of frustrating at first.  If you pass it a double, then it returns a `long`.  If you need an `int` you have to cast it.  

### `Math.log()` and `Math.log10()`

Math.log() returns the "natural log," or the log in base *e*.

Note that you cannot take a log of a negative number.

If you want a log in base 10, use log10()
#### Calculating the log in an arbitrary base
If you want a log of x in arbitrary base b, then use `log(x)/log(b)`

