# 06.040 Char

## Overview

* Java uses Unicode to represent character data
* Character literals are represented by single quotes.  
  * Single quotes are known as apostrophes to programming muggels.
* Characters are effectively integers.
  * characters hold the ASCII/Unicode codes
  * characters may be used in switch / case statements

## Digits as characters

'4' is a character, not an integer value.

## Unicode as char literals

I am assuming an English keyboard.

* You may copy and paste directly.  
* It may also be be represented as a "unicode escape character.
* 
  * char euro = '€';
  * char euro = '\u20A0';

The 16-bit unicode characters can generally be used in variable names.  
### Emoji

### Unicode emoji

[https://emojipedia.org/](https://emojipedia.org/)

## Unicode Escape characters

Escape Sequence|Name|Unicode Code|Decimal Value
:---:|:---|:---|:---:
\b|Backspace|\u0008|8
\t|Tab|\u0009|9
\n|Linefeed|\000A|10
\f|Formfeed|\000C|12
\r|Carriage Return|\000D|13
\\\\ |Backslash|\005C|92
\\"|Double Quote|\00CC|34

These are the only escape sequences allowed in Java.  Some languages allow almost any character to be escaped.  But Java is more strict.
### The important escape codes to know.

Escape Sequence|Name|Unicode Code|Decimal Value
:---:|:---|:---|:---:
\t|Tab|\u0009|9
\n|Linefeed|\000A|10
\\\\ |Backslash|\005C|92
\\"|Double Quote|\00CC|34

## Casting

Character types may be cast to any numeric type.

Most often, casting is between `int` and `char`

If casting from an integer, only the rightmost 16 bits are converted to unicode characters.

# Comparing Characters

Characters are compared based on the Unicode values of the characters

* Upper case characters are all ***less than*** lower case letters.
* Digits are less then letters
* Blank spaces are less than any printable characters.
## The Character Class

[https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Character.html](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Character.html)

The "is" methods are probably the most important for programmers in North America and Western Europe.

* boolean isDigit(char ch)
* boolean isLetter(char ch)
* boolean isUpperCase(char ch)
* boolean isLowerCase(char ch)

The "to" methods are also important.

* char toUpperCase(char ch);
* char toLowerCase(char ch)






