# 07.020 Random Numbers

Random numbers are important part of many computer applications.  That includes games as well as many more serious applications.   There are many cybersecurity applications that demand large numbers of high-quality random numbers.

First, most computers cannot generate true random numbers.

It is possible to get hardware generators of various types.  Some of the best random number generators use things like the decay of radioactive particles to generate random numbers.

A second type of random number generator collects "entropy" from things like voltage fluctuations on the power line and network traffic.  These can be done either inside the computer or in an external device such as [this one](https://www.amazon.com/TrueRNGpro-Hardware-Random-Number-Generator/dp/B01JTJ6D0S/)  The advantage of external devices is that the are more immune from hacking or being influence by a predictable pattern in the computer.  This type of random number is usually very limited in its quantity.

A third way of generating random numbers is the use of "pseudo-random" numbers.  These are generated by processing a series of numbers from a mathmatical process.  This method can generate many random numbers quickly.  But the results are not as good as "true" random numbers.  But they are adequate for most purposes.

The Math.random() method returns pseudo-random numbers.  However, Java does have ways of reading hardware-generated numbers from the operating system.



## The `Math.random()` method

Find the `Math.random()`method in the Math API. You may click on the function to get additional information.

### What gets returned by `Math.random()`

Math.random() returns a double.  It is a double.  The double will be at least 0.0, and it will always be *less than* 1.0.  It can never be exactly 1.0.  Mathmatically: 

 $0.0 <= r < 1.0$

Here is some sample code.

```java
        double x = Math.random();
        System.out.printf("%1.16f\n",x);
```
Produces the following output:

```text
      0.4786284522680991
```

Running the program again will generate a different random number:

```text
     0.0589304592249894
```

We haven't done loops yet, but hopefully you can figure out what is going on.

```java
   double x;
        int i = 0;
        do {
            i++;
            x = Math.random();
            System.out.printf("Round %d generated %1.16f\n", i, x);
        } while (x > 0.20000000);
        System.out.println("Done!");
```

One run generated this:

```text
Round 1 generated 0.3043716995785932
Round 2 generated 0.7567066714428211
Round 3 generated 0.9430947193799047
Round 4 generated 0.0342099365345219
Done!
```


        double x;
        int i = 0;
        do {
            i++;
            x = Math.random() * 100.;
            System.out.printf("Round %d generated %1.1f%%\n", i, x);
        } while (x > 20.000000);

This seems like an odd way of producing random numbers, but it is the most common way to represent random numbers.  

```java

        double x;
        int i = 0;
        do {
            i++;
            x = Math.random() * 100.;
            System.out.printf("Round %d generated %1.1f%%\n", i, x);
        } while (x > 20.000000);
```
Here are some sample results from this run.  Note that the loop ran until a random value less than 20% was generated.

```text
Round 1 generated 47.9%
Round 2 generated 56.2%
Round 3 generated 56.4%
Round 4 generated 63.8%
Round 5 generated 8.9%
```

Here is another use of percentages.  It may be interpreted as a a percentage.  For example, suppose a player has a 10% chance of winning a TV, a 20% chance of winning a phone case, and 70% chance of getting the default prize.  The code for this might look like this:

```java
double pick = Math.random();
String prize = "???";
if(pick < 0.10){
    prize = "TV";
}else if (pick < 0.30){
    prize = "phone case";
}else{
    prize = "20% coupon for Pizza Hut";
}
System.out.println("Your prize is " + prize);
```

Or suppose we want to simulate a coin toss.  This would be a good situation for the conditional operator:

```java
String coin = (Math.random()< 0.50)?"Heads":"Tails";
```

## Generating random integers.

Let's say there are 6 possible outcomes to an event, and all have an equal chance (for example, rolling a since die)

If we multiply the random number times 6, we will get a number that is 0 through 5.999999...  If we convert it to an integer we will get an integer from 0 through 5.  If we want 1 through 6, we just add 1.

Note that in the following example we do not need to have a default clause because it is logically impossible to have any value other than 1 through 6.

```java
int die = (int) (Math.random() * 6) + 1;
        String prize = "???";
        System.out.println("You rolled a " + die);

        switch (die) {
            case 1:
                prize = "can of pop";
                break;
            case 2:
                prize = "bag of pretzels";
                break;
            case 3:
                prize = "taco";
                break;
            case 4:
                prize = "hot dog";
                break;
            case 5:
                prize = "donut";
                break;
            case 6:
                prize = "pack of gum";
        }
```