# 02.040 Expressions

Loosely, an expression is something that returns a value.

An expression may be just a literal, variable, functions, or combination of expressions connected by operators.

Examples of expressions:

* 5
* price * 0.675
* salesTax
* Math.sqrt(49.0)
* (-b + Math.sqrt(b*b - 4ac))/2a
* "Hello, " + firstName

Note that the definition of an expression is recursive.  An expression may include smaller expressions.

Expressions are on the right side of an = symbol, but that is not the only place.  They also can occur in places like System.out.println(expression).

There are different types of expressions:

* Arithmetic expressions return numeric values
* String expressions return strings.
* Boolean expressions return true or false

## Order of Operation

The order of operations generally follows the rules of Algebra.  

* Multiplication and division are done before addition and subtraction.  (There is no exponentiation operator in Java, so it is not part of order of operation considerations.)  
* Operations are then performed left to right.  
* Parenthesis may be used to modify the order of operation.

## Type conversions
As noted previously, Java will automatically "promote" data types if necessary.  However the promotion only occurs when mixed mode arithmetic is actually needed.  

For example, the area of a triangle is 1/2 * base * height, or $\frac{1}{2}*b*h$

If we code this up in Java we get

```java
    double area;
    double base = 6.0;
    double height = 5.0;

    area = (1/2) * base * height;
```

The above will calculate the area as 0.0.  This is because (1/2) is done with integer division.  This gives a value of 0 as an integer.  The integer 0 gets promoted to a double 0.0.  But it is too late.  We now end up multiplying 0.0 times other numbers.  This will give us zero no matter what values the base and height have.

There are several possible fixes.  Perhaps the easiest is to code the statement so that the constants are given as doubles.  Below are three alternatives.  All of these options would work.

```java
    area = (1./2) * base * height;
    area = (1/2.) * base * height;
    area = (1./2.) * base * height;
    area = ((double)1/2) * base * height;  //This is a "cast." More on casts next week.
```
Mixed-mode arithmetic can be tricky!  Avoid it if possible.

```java
System.out.println( 1/2 * base * height);  //Prints 0.0
System.out.println( (1/2) * base * height);//Prints 0.0
System.out.println( base * height * (1/2));//Prints 0.0
System.out.println( base * height * 1/2); //Prints 25.0 (Why?)
```
## Math Functions you should know

* Math.sqrt()
* Math.abs()
* Math.random()  Produces a double, r, where $0.0 \leq r \lt 1.0$
* Math.pow()  //takes two arguments!

Most Math functions that work with real numbers return doubles.

### Exponentiation

Java does not have an exponentiation operator.

Small integer exponents may be evaluated as simple multiplication.  For example $3^2$ may be calculated as $3*3$.  

More complex exponentiation may be done with the Math.pow() function.  $3^{2.5}$ could be evaluated as Math.pow(3, 2).  The pow function returns a double.

## String Expressions

The String API  [https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html)

String functions to know

Returns | Method Name | Explanation
:---:|:---|:---
int|length()|The number of characters in a string
String|trim()|The string with leading and trailing white space removed
boolean|isEmpty()|Returns true if the string is empty
boolean|contains(s)| Returns true if s is in the string
boolean|equals(s)|Returns true if s contains the same characters as the string
boolean|equalsIgnoreCase(s)|

String operations are usually case sensitive unless "ignoreCase" is appended

### Calling `String` methods

String methods do not take the string being acted on as an argument.  We use the "dot operator."

```java
String s "Something  ";
String t;

int numberOfCharacters = s.length();
t = s.trim();
```
The value of to the left of the dot operator must be a string.  It may be a variable, a literal, or a String method that returns a string.

```java
t = s.trim();
numberOfCharacters = "abcd".length();
numberOfCharacters = s.trim().length();
### Concatenation

Strings may be "concatenated" or "stuck together" with a + operator.

If a string appears before the first + in the expression, then the number is promoted to a String.

```java
System.out.println("My name is"+ " " + "Max");
System.out.println("4" + "2");   //Prints 42, not 6
System.out.println("Age is " + age);
```