# 04.047 Danger Zones

There are quite a few subtle things that can cause comparisons to give some surprising results.  This unit will look at two big ones.

## Floating point equality

This section applies to both `float` and `double` data types.

You have to be very careful about doing == and != operations on floating point numbers.  

For example, in everyday practice, 1.5 + 1.5 is .3.   And also, .1 + .2 is also equal to .3.  So it is common sense that the following expression should be true.

```java
       .15 + .15 == .1 + .2
```
However, if you run the following you will see why the above expression prints out as false:

```java
          System.out.printf("%1.17f %1.17f\n", .15 + .15, .1 + .2);
```

This produces the following output:

```txt
    0.30000000000000000 0.30000000000000004
```

They are only off by .00000000000000004 but that is enough to make them not equal.

There are a couple of ways to handle floating point operations.  One method is to only do >, &lt;, &lt;= and >=.

There is another commonly used method that will be discussed in the next chapter because they involve use of math functions.

## Gotcha:  Testing equality of real numbers

In almost all cases, do not use == and != with float data types.  It invites problems with rounding errors.

```
## The following is done in Python, but jshell would work as well.  Python is a bit less verbose
>>> (1.1 + 1.1 + 1.1) == 3.3
False
```
If you need to test for equality, it is usually better to take the absolute value of the difference.  If the difference is smaller than some small number (often called EPSILON) then the numbers are "close enough" to be equal.

```
>>> EPSILON = .0005
>>> abs(3.3 - (1.1+1.1+1.1)) < EPSILON
True
```
The other solution is to avoid using == and !=.  Generally things like <= and >= are considered as OK, but be aware of whether even these are appropriate.

## String Comparison

There are a lot of situations where it is necessary to compare two strings to each other.  For this chapter, don't do string comparisons.  Syntactically it is possible to use the operators like  "Abe" &lt; "Bob."  But it will not give the results  you are most likely expecting.

We will look at String comparisons in another chapter.

## Avoid complicated boolean expressions

Boolean expressions can get complicated and prone to error when they start getting complicated.  They also get tricky when NOT operations are involved.  Compound statements with ! get especially tricky for most humans.

There are several ways to avoid these problems

### Try to phrase problems in terms of positive statements.

Consider the problem of whether someone can fly in space.  For example, the space station mission specialists cannot be under 149cm.  But there is another requirement that they cannot be over 193cm.  These requirements are based on things like the size of sleeping spaces.

These requirements can be stated as "The astronaut may not be under 149 cm and they cannot be over 193.  Try coding up this logic on your own.  It can be done!

Or the requirements may be restated as "The astronaut must be at least 149cm and no more than 193cm.  This coding is commonly understood by most experienced programmers.  It becomes `(height>=149 && height<=193)`.  In the "olden days" of 1950 though the 1990s there would have been concern with making this more efficient by coding it as `(height > 148 && height < 194)`.  The computer could do that calculation slightly faster.  However, modern Java compilers automatically optimize the first statement so that when it executes with the same efficiency as the second.  Therefore it is generally better to state the problem exactly as you mean it, and then code it that way.

Another way to handle this kind of situation is to create boolean variables as separate statements.  Modern compilers are good at optimizing these types of operations so they are efficient.  Suppose that in addition to the age, there is a requirement that mission specialists must be able to bench press at least 100kg and be in the age range of 25 through 55.  This would be very complicated if coded as one long boolean expression.  But it is quite readable and checkable if it is broken into smaller operations.

```java
boolean heightOK = (height >= 149 and height <=193);
boolean strongEnough = (pressWeight > 148);
boolean ageOK = (age >= 25 && age<55)
if(heightOK && strongEnough && ageOK){
    System.out.println("Qualified");
}
```

