# 02.057 Creating a program in VS_Code

## THINK PROJECTS, NOT FILES

Each Java program should be considered a Project.  Projects are based on directories (or folders) and not based on files.  Our files will only make sense in the context of the project or the directory structure.

VS Code is a Microsoft environment, so it tends to use the "folder" terminology rather than directories, even if you are on Linux or Mac.

## Steps

1. Close all directories and files in VS Code  (as you get more experience there is another way to start, but for now, close all directories and files).
2. Get to the "Create Java Project" option.  There are two ways to do this:
   * Open the File Explorer fly-out.  This should have a big button for "Create Java Project showing if you have the Java plugins installed.
   * Do Ctrl-Shift-P (or press F1)  This will open the prompt and you may type "Create Java Project"
3. Select the option "No build tools"
4. Select the project location.  This is a little tricky.  You are selecting the ***parent*** directory/folder. VS Code will be creating the actual folder for your project.  I suggest that you create a folder for this course and a folder within that folder for all homework projects.
5. Put in the name of the project.
6. VS Code should now create the directory structure and open the "root" directory of the project.
7. Open the main .java file.  It will be in a directory called `src`  The default name will be App.java.  For now, just stay with that name.
8. Try running the program.  You may do that in two different ways
   * In the upper right corner there is a green triangle that points to the right
   * In the App.java file there should be a light text that says "Run | Debug"  Click on the Run.
9.  In the App.jav file, fix it for the course style requirements.
  * Remove the words "throws exception"
  * Create a javadoc statement like the following.  Put your name in the `@author` and put the start month and year in the `@since ` fields

```java
/** 
 * This program ....(describe what the program does)
 * 
 * @author Max Griffon
 * @since  January 2022
 */
```

Try running the program again.