02.035 Reading from the Keyboard

The original version of Java did not have a built-in method to read the keyboard.  Honestly, reading directly from the keyboard is not something that is done a lot in modern enterprise-level programming.  However, it is something that is extremely useful when people are first learning programming.  So faculty members were scrambling around looking for a way to read from the keyboard.

The Scanner class emerged as a solution to reading from the keyboard.  The second version of Java included the Scanner class and some other useful utilities as part of a `java.utility` package.

## Packages, Libraries, and APIs

The core of Java is fairly sparse and limited.  It is intended that Java can be extended by adding libraries and packages.  We won't deep dive into packages and libraries here.  For now think of them as collections of classes like the Scanner class.

The Java API is available online.  You may go to [the official Java API website](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/util/Scanner.html)  There should be a search box at the upper right.  Use the box to search for Scanner.

Looking through the Scanner's documentation.

* Note that it is in the `java.util` package
* Look at the "Constructors."  We will need a constructor.  
  * The one with the argument `File` will be of interest to us soon.
  * The one we are most interested in for right now is the one with an `InputStream` as its argument.  The keyboard is an input stream.  It is named `System.in` but that is not something the documentation is not telling us here.  
* Look at the methods.  In Java the term "method" is referred to as a "function" in most other languages.  Technically a method is any function that is defined inside a class.  In Java the only place we can define functions is in a class.  So all functions in Java are also methods.
  * close() closes a file.  We will need that.
  * Look at the next() methods
    * next() by itself is used to read a string from the keyboard.  It is not "nextString()" as we might expect it to be based on the other functions.  
    * nextInt() reads an integer
    * nextDouble() reads a double.

## Streams

When we are doing input and output we encounter a lot of "streams."  A stream is a sequence of characters.  Lots of things can be streams.  The keyboard produces a series of characters, so it is a string.  A file can produce a stream.  A network connection can be a stream.  A string can be a stream.  Now go back and look at the constructors.  Everything used as an argument is some type of input stream of characters.

There are also output streams.  Things like monitors, printers, files, and network connections may be streams.  A lot of the idea behind Java is that software systems consist of programs communicating to each other by passing streams.  One program can produce output streams which are consumed by other programs.

## Intellij and the API

Note that the IDE is actively reading the API.  The most commonly used parts are cached on your computer.  But if you start using a new part of the API the system will go and fetch it as you go along.