# 02.010 Chapter Overview

This document and video cover roughly 2.1 and 2.2 from the Liang textbook.

You should have a background in some programming language.  In this video it is assumed you know the following basics:

* comments
* variables
* calculations and basic math operations
* variable assignments
* String literals
* print statements
* The concept of an algorithm.
* Use of a debugger

The rest of the chapter will be elaborating on the above concepts and adding a few related ideas.

Python programmers should hold onto their hats because there is a ton of vital information that will be presented in this chapter.  Python programmers are used to the "number" data type.  Java will introduce at least 7 different primitive data types and that doesn't count the number classes like "BigInteger."  In Python we mostly have one replacement symbol ( = ).  In Java we will find about 10 different variations of this simple concept.

This chapter will also introduce the printf statement.  Printf is not presented in this chapter.  Printf was originally part of the C language.  However, some formatted printf type of function appears in most software development environbnments.  We will start gently in this chapter.  The printf format codes will be introduced alongside the primitive data types that correspond to them.

I strongly suggest that you read this chapter with IntelliJ open and a simple program shell set up.  That way you can test and try things as you study the chapter. 

## Java concepts in the demo program

### Declaring variables

In Python there is the "number" data type.  In includes both integers and real numbers.  In Java there is a huge divide between integers and real numbers.  The closest data type to the Python "number" is called a "double" in Java.  

In Java ids must be defined before they may be used.  In Java the following statements would declare a variable and then use an assignment to give the variable a value.

```java
   double width;
   width = 5.0;
   System.out.println(width);
```
The following cuts out a step by declaring a variable and assigning it an initial value.  Note that in this case the 6 is written without a decimal point.  Generally it would be better style to have written 6. or 6.0.  However, this illustrates how Java "promotes" integers to real numbers when it needs to do so.  Notice that the output is represented as 6.0, indicating that Java is treating the 6 as a real number.  (Yes, I realize that in Mathematics an integer is a real number.  But in the context of this course we will speak of them as if they are different because they are treated differently in many situations.)

```java
   double length = 6;
   System.out.println(length);
```

### //In Line Comments 

In Python the # sysmbol indicate the remainder of the line is a comment.  In Java two "forward slashes" indicate the rest of the line is a comment.

### Basic arithmetic operators

The Java arithmetic operators are similar to Python, but they are not identical.

Symbol|Operation
:---:|:--
+|Addition
-|Subtraction
*|Multiplication
/|Division
%|Modulo (Remainder)

Not that there is no exponentiation operator in Java.  In addition, the / symbol works differently for real numbers and integers.  The modulo operator only applies to integers.

### Strings and String Concatination

#### 'Single Quotes' and "Double Quotes"

In computer science we often talk about 'single quotes' and "double quotes."  Ordinary humans just call them apostrophes and quotes.

In some languages single and double quotes may be used interchangeably.  But in Java they have different meanings.

Double quotes are used to indicate string literals.  Single quotes are used to indicate character data.  Yes, Java treats character data differently than String data.  (Notice that String is capitalized. Strings are a class in Java.)

```java
   System.out.println("Hello, World!");
   System.out.println("E");  //A string may be a single characters
   System.out.println(" ");  //This string contains a single blank character
   System.out.println("");   //This is an "Empty String"
```