# 02.020 Ids
## Ids are just names we pick.

We have a lot of things that need names.  Variables, functions, and classes need names.

* Ids *must* follow the rules of syntax.
* Ids *should* follow the style guidelines.  
   * The style guidelines of Java are more standardized and are followed much more strictly than in most other languages.

### Id Syntax rules

* An identifier must start with a letter, an underscore, or a dollar sign. (But see the cautions below about the starting character.)
* After the first character, the following characters may be letters, digits, underscores, or dollar signs
* An identifier may be of any length greater than or equal to 1
* An identifier may not be a "reserved word."  

#### **Java Reserved words**

&nbsp;|&nbsp;|&nbsp;|&nbsp;|&nbsp;|&nbsp;
---|---|---|---|---|---
abstract | assert | boolean | break | byte | case
catch | char | class | const | continue | default
double | do | else | enum | extends | false
final | finally | float | for | goto | if
implements | import | instanceof | int | interface | long
native | new | null | package | private | protected
public | return | short | static | strictfp | super
switch | synchronized | this | throw | throws | transient
true | try | void | volatile | while |&nbsp;


#### Case Sensitive

In Java identifiers are "Case Sensitive."  Case Sensitive means that there is a difference between lower and upper case.

For example salestax, salesTax, and Salestax are all different ids because they are capitalized differently.  Note that Salestax or SalesTax would be good ids to use for a class, but not for a variable.

##### camelCase

"camelCase" is commonly used in many modern programming languages.

camelCase is used when an id is a combination of words.  In camelCase the first word is *not* capitalized, but all words after the first word are capitalized.  Examples would be salesTax, payRate, and employeeNumber.

An alternative to camelCase is the use of underscores to create identifiers that are compound words.  Examples would be sales_tax, pay_rate, and employee_number.  In Java camelCase is commonly used, and underscore use is rare.  Standard Java conventions use camelCase, not underscores.

### Java Style for identifiers

In many languages there are style guidelines that are widely ignored.  However, in Java major developers adhere to the style guidelines almost as if they are enforced in syntax.

* Only class names start with upper case letters.  Variables and functions should begin with lower case letters
* Constants should be ALLCAPS.
* Use camelCase, not underscores for compound words
* Spell out words; don't abbreviate
* Do not use $ in identifiers written by hand; they should be reserved for machine-generated identifiers
* Do not start identifiers with _ or __ (two underscores.)  They are reserved to indicate special operations.
* Use names that are meaningful.  The code should be as self-documenting as possible.

And example of capitalization would be ```Math.PI```. The capital M indicates that "Math" is a class.  PI is capitalized which indicates it is a constant

```java
   System.out.println(Math.PI)
```
produces the output
```text
   3.141592653589793
```
#### Lesser style suggestions

* Variables should be nouns.  Functions should be verbs.
* Avoid single-letter variables except for short term standard cases
   * i, j, and k are index variables in loops
   * n is the number of items on a list
   * s and t are short-term variables to hold Strings.
   * x,y are real numbers
   * Do not abbreviate.  The style in Java is to spell out words.
     * You don't need to worry about whether you (or the person who originally wrote the code) abbreviated
     * You don't need to worry about what abbreviation was used.
   