# 10.040 Reading from a file

## Opening a file

In Java, there are many ways to read from a file.  We will be using our old friend, the Scanner class.

## Streams

The Scanner class works with *character streams.*  A stream is a source that puts out a series of bytes.  A character stream puts out a stream of Unicode characters.

Some common streams would be:

* input from the keyboard
* a text file
* a site on the Internet

## Location of files

A file may be specified by name or by location and name.  Together, the directory plus the file name make up the path.

### Relative path

A *relative path* would be the location relative to the root of the project.  The simplest path would be in the root of the project itself.  So if you are going to have a file called data.txt, then just put it in the root of the project.

To set the file name in Java, you would just do something like the following:

```java
String fileName = "data.txt";
```

If you wanted to put the data files in a folder called "input" the you could do something like the following on Windows and Unix types of systems (such as Linux or Mac).  Notice that Windows system would need to "escape" the folder delimiter.

```java
String unixFileName = "input/data.txt";
String windowsFileName = "input\\data.txt";
```

### Absolute path

An *absolute path* would be the path from the "root" of the device.  For example, suppose a user named "Max" has a folder in their home folder.  On a Linux or a Mac, the absolute path would look like the following:

```
/home/Max/data.txt
```
On a Windows system, it would be at something like the following:
```
 C:\users\Max\data.txt
```
The problem for a Windows user is that in Java, the \ is an escape character, and the escape character would need to be escaped.  It is common to assign the file name to a variable.  Here is how the assignment would look on a *nix and a Windows system.

```java
String unixFileName = "/home/Max/data.txt";
String windowsFileName = "C:\\users\\Max\data.txt";
```

The saving grace here is that recent versions of Windows will sometimes take the "unix" / instead of the rather obnoxious \\.

#### The problem with absolute path names in a course

If you turn in your source code, there is a problem with absolute path names.  The instructor's computer probably does not have the same directory or folder structure as your system.  Therefore the locations will not match. That is a big reason for using relative paths in this course.

## Opening and closing a file

The code for opening a file is fairly straightforward.  But files should always be closed explicitly.

```java
//open the file
String fileName = "data.txt";
File file = new File(fileName);
Scanner input = new Scanner(file);

//use the file  (just like using input from the keyboard)
String line = input.nextLine();
System.out.println(line);

//close the stream from the file
input.close();
```

The problem is that opening a file can throw an exception.  Therefore we need a try...catch block.

```java
        String fileName = "data.txt";
        File file = new File(fileName);
        try {
            Scanner input = new Scanner(file);
            String line = input.nextLine();
            System.out.println(line);
            input.close();
        } catch (FileNotFoundException e) {
            System.err.println(e.getMessage());
        }
```