# 10.030 Splitting Strings

Strings may be split into arrays.

[https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html#split(java.lang.String)](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html#split(java.lang.String))

Look at the definition of the `split` method:

```text
public String[] split​(String regex)
```

Notice that the return type is `String[]`.  That means the split method returns an array of Strings.

## regex

The formal parameter is "regex."  Regex is a pattern to be matched.  Regex patterns can get very complex.  Don't freak out about them.

The simplest regex pattern is just a symbol in double quotes.  The formal argument specifies the pattern that is used to separate the shorter strings in the longer strings.

A blank space is the most common regex character.  It works to separate words.  So the following line would yield 5 strings in the array.

```java
String line = "Sheldon Cooper Penny Leonard Hofstadter";
String[] words = line.split(" ");
```
However, maybe the blank spaces are significant.  Therefore we might want to use a different delimimiter.

```java
String line = "Sheldon Cooper|Penny|Leonard Hofstadter";
String[] people = line.split("|");
```

You may use any character as a delimiter, but ideally you want to pick a delimiter that will not show up in the text itself.  The other complication is that regex expressions use some special characters, and you cannot use those as separators unless they are "escaped."  Do not use these characters as separators if you can help it.
```
+-|$^[]()!
```

If you want to use one of these characters (or if you are given a file using one of these characters), then you must use \\ before the character to escape it.

```java
String[] names = line.split("\\|");
```

The  tab character "\t" is often a useful delimiter, especially when working with data exported from spreadsheets.  Most Spreadsheets export data in "tab delimited" format.

Empty lines are also a problem.  Split will return 1 String for an empty line.  The solution to see whether you have a full line or an empty line is to trim() the line and then check its length.