# 02.080 Numeric Data Types and Operations

# Arithmetic Operators

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
+|Addition
-|Subtraction
*|Multiplication
/|Division
%|Modulo

***Be careful with Integer Division***


## Integer increment and decrement operations

The increment and decrement operations add one or subtract one.  The following are all the same if they are on their own lines:

* i = i+1;
* i += 1;
* i++;
* ++i;

and

* i = i-1;
* i -= 1;
* i--;
* --i;

However, i++ and ++i may be in expressions.  These two operators basically ignore the precedence of the rest of the expression.  The same applies to i-- and --i

* i++ is done *after* the rest of the expression is evaluated
* ++i is done *before* the rest of the expression is evaluated


## Exponentiation

Use the Power function for exponentiation

*  2<sup>3</sup> is coded as `Math.pow(2,3)`
* -3.2<sup>-0.5</sup> $ is coded as `Math.pow(-3.2,-0.5)`

## Numeric Literals

## Floating Point Literals

Numbers with decimal points are assumed to be doubles.

If you want a number to be a float, or to assign it to a float variable, append F to the end of the number

``` java
float small = 1.0F;
```

### Scientific Notation

1.234 x 10<sup>5</sup> becomes 1.234E5

### Integer literals

Integers may be assigned to a variable as long as they fit.

byte b;
int whole;
long big;

* b = 110 //OK
* b = 129 //Not OK
* whole = 2000000000 //OK
* whole = 3000000000 //Not OK
* big = 3000000000L//OK, but the L is needed to indicate "long"

For Long literals, you may technically use lower or upper case L, but avoid lower case because it looks like a 1 in some fonts.

***DO NOT START INTEGERS WITH A ZERO***

Literals are assumed to be digital (base 10)

* Literals starting with 0 are interpreted as octal (Base 8)
* Literals starting with 0B are interpreted as binary (base 2)
* Literals starting with 0X are interpreted as hex (base 16)

What is output by the following?

```java
System.out.println(0B10);
System.out.println(0B101);
System.out.println(0B1111);
System.out.println(0B01000001);
System.out.println(07);
System.out.println(010);
System.out.println(077);
System.out.println(0X10);
System.out.println(0xFF);
```
## Type Conversions and Promotions

The key is that java does not allow losing significant digits by default.  Java requires use of "casts" when precision will be lost.

Java allows "promotion."  So it is OK to assign a float to a double.

### Cast Operator

The cast operator is a datatype in parenthesis

```java
float little = 7.0F
double big;

big = little; //This works
little = big //This is an error
little = (float)big;  // The cast is required
```

    
