# 03.005 Printf

## `print` vs `println`

So far we have had two output statements.  Both of them just printed a String.  Numbers could be printed, but we did not have much control over their format.

* System.out.println();
* System.out.print();

System.out.print does *not* print a newline character at the end of the line.

### The newline `\n` character

The newline characters is `'\n'`

I am talking about the character, so I used single quotes. A newline String would be in double quotes like this `"\n"`. 

The newline starts a new line wherever it occurs.

```java
String s = "The Good\nThe Bad\nThe Ugly";
System.out.print(s);
```

Produces

```text
The Good
The Bad
The Ugly
```

### Newline in Output statements

You may append "\n" to the end of a string in System.out.print to simulate a println.

If you append "\n" at the end of System.out.println string you effectively double space

### Println without an argument

Doing `System.out.println()` with no argument produces a newline

### Complex concatenations

```java
        final double INCHES_PER_CENTIMETER = 0.393701;
        double inches;
        double centimeters = 10.0;

        inches = centimeters / INCHES_PER_CENTIMETER;

        System.out.println(INCHES_PER_CENTIMETER);
        System.out.println("Inches Per Centimeter: " + INCHES_PER_CENTIMETER);

        System.out.println(centimeters + " centimeters is " + inches + " inches.");
```

Produces 

```text
Inches Per Centimeter: 0.393701
10.0 centimeters is 25.399986284007404 inches.
```
## printf

Another option is System.out.printf

### History and importance

The printf() function has its roots in the C language.\

### Java printf 

[Java Printf summary](https://alvinalexander.com/programming/printf-format-cheat-sheet/)  You don't have to know this for the exam, but it might be a useful resource

For now you need to know three "format specifiers."  There are a lot more, but these will cover most common situations:

Format Specifier|Data types|Comments
:---:|:---|:---
%d| integer types, including `int`|Note that it is %d.  This stands for "decimal."  It is an integer printed in decimal.
%f| floating point types, including `double`|
%s| `String`|

### `System.out.printf(format_string, list of values separated by commas)`

The System.out.printf method usually contains at least two arguments.

* The first argument is the "format string
  * This is a string with Format Specifiers (such as %d, %f, %s) as placeholders for the values that will be inserted.
  * printf does not include a newline character.  For most of your first few programs `\n` will probably be appended to most format strings.
* There will normally be a comma after the format string.  Then there will be a list of expressions
  * The number of expressions should match the number of format specifiers
  * The sequence of variables will be matched in order to the number format specifiers.
    * Make sure the data types match!

