# 03.025 Increment and Decrement Operators

One of the most common operations in programming is to add 1.  The following style of statement is extremely common:

`x = x+1;`

Of course, this may be shortened to

`x += 1;`

But there is actually a shorter form (well, actually 4 shorter forms, but more on that later)

`x++;`

But there's more!  ++ is actually an operator.  There is a prefix version and a postfix notation.  The difference is subtle, but important.

# `++` as a Prefix operator

When the ++ operator appears *before* an operand, 1 is added to the operand *before any other operation.*  Even things like parenthesis are disregarded.  After the operand is incremented then the rest of the expression is evaluated.

```java
int i = 5;
int j;

j = ++i * 3;
System.out.println("i is " + i);
System.out.println("j is " + j);
```

The above prints

```text
i is 6
j is 18  //note that this is 3 * 6
```

# `++` as a Postfix operator

When the ++ operator appears *after* an operand, 1 is added to the operand *after all other operations.*  Even things like parenthesis are disregarded.  *After* the rest of the expression has been evaluated, then the operand is incremented

```java
int i = 5;
int j;

j = i++ * 3;
System.out.println("i is " + i);
System.out.println("j is " + j);
```

The above prints

```text
i is 6
j is 15  //note that this is 3 * 5
```

## Origins of the ++ operator

The ++ operator was an important aspect of the C and C++ programming languages.  Both of them did a lot of "pointer arithmetic."  That is, they did arithmetic on memory locations.  Pointer arithmetic proved to have a lot of problems.  One of the biggest single changes in Java was eliminating pointer arithmetic. Therefore the need for prefix and postfix operators is greatly diminished.

### Recommended use of ++ operators

I recommend that in Java you should not embed ++ operators in other expressions.  Use them only on their own.  There are some specific places they are useful, and we will use them quite a bit after the next couple of chapters. But for now only use it on a line by itself.

#### Do prefix and postfix matter?

If the ++ operator is used outside of an expression, then it doesn't matter if you use prefix or postfix notation.  The notation only matters if you put the postfix notation in a larger expression.

Traditionally the postfix notation is most commonly used.  In the original decade or two of C, the postfix operator is somewhat more efficient when translated into object code.  But modern compilers are optimized to remove the inefficiencies of the prefix operator.

The following would produce the same results with the prefix and postfix operators.

```java
int i = 5;
int j = 5;

i++;
++j;

System.out.println("i is " + i);
System.out.println("j is " + j);
```

The above prints

```text
i is 6
j is 6
```

## The `--` decrement operators

There is also a decrement version of the prefix and postfix.  They subtract 1.  

```java
int i = 5;
int j = 5;

i--;
--j;

System.out.println("i is " + i);
System.out.println("j is " + j);
```

The above prints

```text
i is 6
j is 6
```

## One last thing

The Prefix and Postfix operators may only work on simple variables.  They cannot work on arithmetic expressions.  For example, the following would not work.

(i + j)++


