# 02.52 Complete Program

```java
/**
* This program demonstrates a "Hello, World" program with comments
*
* @author Evan Noynaert
* @since September, 2021
*
*/
public class Hello {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello, World!");
    }    
}
```

* Remember that class ids are capitalized.
* The file name must match the name of the class.
  * The file containing the above code must be named "Hello.java" and capitalization matters, even on Windows.

## All code is in a class

* All executable code must be in a class.  
* There may only be one public class per file.
* There is one method (function) where the program starts execution.  
  * This function *must* be called "main"
  * The function must be declared with the following format.  There is not much room for creativity.

```java
public static void main(String[] args){
    //Code goes here
}
```

## Important differences between Java and Python

### Functions vs Methods

Python has both functions and methods.  Methods are functions that are part of a class.  In Java all functions must be in classes, therefore technically Java only has methods and does not have functions.  but in practice people often use the terms functions and methods when talking about methods.

### Comments

Python has one type of comment.  Java has three types of comments.

* // means the rest of the line is a comment.  This is just like the # in Python
* /*     */ may be used for single-line or multi-line comments.  Mostly it is used for multi-line comments *within methods*
* /**    */ This style of comment is used before classes and methods.  
  * Each line starts with an asterisk (*)
  * There is a program called "javadoc" that pulls out these comments and makes them into documentation as a web site.
  * You can put html into tags.  The Javadoc program will interpret them
  * There are a lot of tags that may be used.  For now we will only use a couple.
    * @author specifies the author of the program
    * @since is the start date of the documentation

### In Java blocks are defined by { }

Python uses indentation to identify blocks.  Java uses { and }.  Java should be indented like Python, but indentation is not enforced by syntax.

In Java, the document formatter in VS Code is your friend.

```python
   #Python function
   def square(number):
       return number * number
```

```java
   //Java method 
   public static double myFunction(double number){
       return number * number;
   }
```

 ### Executable statements and variable declarations must end with a semicolon (;)

 ### Java has two versions of the print statement

 * `System.out.println("Some expression");` puts a carriage return at the end of the line
 * `System.out.print("Some expression");` leave the output on the same line.

 * `System.out.println("");` gives a blank line.
 * Putting \n in a String expression also generates a carriage return.  The following are equivalent output.

 ```java
 System.out.println("");
 System.out.println("Hello, World!");
 System.out.println("");
 ```

 ```java
 System.out.println("\nHello, World!\n");
 ```

 ## About the package statement

 VS Code may insert a line that starts with "package."  For now just ignore that line.