04week/004.010_Boolean_Type_and_Expressions.md, before:

# 04.010 Boolean Type and Expressions

Boolean expressions have a value of true or false.

Unlike C/C++ integer data types may not be used as booleans

## Boolean Operators

The Boolean operators only work on numeric types

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
<|Less Than
<=|Less than or equal to
\>|Greater than
\>=|Greater than or equal to
==|Equal to
!=|Not equal to

! generally means "Not"

Random fact: In IT, ! is often called "bang" when it means something other than "not"

### English and operators

* "At least" usually means >= or <=
* "Thru" usually means <= or >=
* "Over" usually means >
* "Up to" usually means <
* more????

## Gotcha:  Testing equality of real numbers

In almost all cases, do not use == and != with float data types.  It invites problems with rounding errors.

```
## The following is done in Python, but jshell would work as well.  Python is a bit less verbose
>>> (1.1 + 1.1 + 1.1) == 3.3
False
```
If you need to test for equality, it is usually better to take the absolute value of the difference.  If the difference is smaller than some small number (often called EPSILON) then the numbers are "close enough" to be equal.

```
>>> EPSILON = .0005
>>> abs(3.3 - (1.1+1.1+1.1)) < EPSILON
True
```
The other solution is to avoid using == and !=.  Generally things like <= and >= are considered as OK, but be aware of whether even these are appropriate.


## Logical Operators

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
&&|and
\|\||or
!|not

&& has higher precedence than ||

Like C/C++, the single & and | are used are *Bitwise Operators* that we will not cover in this course.  They aren't hard, but they are mainly of interest in specialized fields of programming.
 

## Boolean variables

Boolean variables may hold values of `true` or `false`

Boolean variables may be on the left side of the assignment operator = as long as the expression to the right of the = is a boolean expression.

```java
boolean hasFever;
boolean lowFever;
boolean yes;
String answer;

hasFever = (temperature > 98.6)
lowFever = (temperature > 98.6 && temperature < 101.5)
yes = answer.startsWith("y") || answer.startsWith("Y")

```

Program example

```java
package chapter03;

import java.util.Scanner;

/**
 * Demonstrates using a boolean variable
 */
class LightsOn{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        int peopleHome = 0;
        boolean lightsOn = false;
        Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);
        
        System.out.print("How many people are home? ");
        peopleHome = input.nextInt();
        lightsOn = peopleHome > 0;
        System.out.println("Lights on: "+lightsOn);
    }
}
```

### DO NOT CODE LIKE THIS:

```java
if(peopleHome > 0)
   lightsOn = true;
else
   lightsOn = false;
```

Instead, do this:

```java
lightsOn = (peopleHome > 0);
```

Also, don't do this:

```java
if(lightsOn==true)
```

And finally, `!lightsOn` is better than `lightsOn==false`

The () are not needed, but they improve readability

## `if` statements

### Blocks of Code

A block of code is a series of lines of code that should be treated as a single statement

### if syntax

```text
if(boolean expression)
   single statement or block
```

```java
if(lightsOn){
    System.out.println("Lights are on");
}
```

## `if...else`

Like Python and C++

### elseif

Java does not have `elseif` or `elif`.  But you may use `else if`

#### Practical guidelines

* Indentation is not required by syntax, but do it anyway
* Technically the {} are not required for a single statement in the body, but use them anyway.
* Note that a boolean variable is technically a boolean expression
* Punctuation
    * Put the opening { on the same line as the if or else
    * Align the } and }else{ with the corresponding if statement
* Avoid complex boolean conditions
    * Use intermediate boolean variables
    * Use nested ifs instead of compound expressions
* If you have && and || in the same statement, then use parenthesis for clarity, even if they are not technically needed.

```java
import java.util.Scanner;

/**
 * Demonstrates nested if statements
 */
public class NestedIf {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        double temperature;
        Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);

        System.out.print("\nWhat is the temperature? ");
        temperature = input.nextDouble();
        System.out.print("\nIf the temperature is "+temperature+" I suggest that you ");

        if(temperature < 32.0){
            System.out.println("go ice skating.");
        }else if(temperature < 70.0){
            System.out.println("go hiking.");
        }else if(temperature < 85){
            System.out.println("go for a walk.");
        }else{
            System.out.println("go swimming.");
        }

        System.out.println("\nDone\n");
        input.close();
    }
}
```

## Ranges

boolean eligible = (age >= 18) && (age <= 35)

## Avoid == on real numbers

This is a very good Computerphile video on floating point numbers:

* [Computerphile video on floating point numbers](https://youtu.be/PZRI1IfStY0)

```java
boolean test = (1.1+1.1+1.1 == 3.3)
```

```java
final double EPSILON = 0.00001;
boolean test = Math.abs(1.1+1.1+1.1 - 3.3) < EPSILON;
```

## General warning

***Be very careful with logic***

* Avoid not except in simple and intuitive situations
* Avoid "reversing" the logic, especially on ranges 
    * DeMorgan's theorum is relevant, but beyond the scope of what we are talking about
* Try to keep logic as simple and intuitive as possible.  Make it simple in English, then code it that way.
* Avoid complex compound logic
  * Break components down into boolean variables if possible
  * Use nest if and chained if statements to simplify logic
* Use a lot of parenthesis to clarify precedence, even if they are not necessary


## Comparing Strings

The relational operators do not work with strings.

There are boolean functions in the String class that handle some common situations.

[https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html)

The main comparison method is the .compareTo() method, but we will cover that later.  For now we will try to make due with String methods.

## Class Problem

To qualify for a scholarship:

* Student age must be over 65 or 18 through 35
* GPA must be 3.5 or higher
* ACT score 22 or higher
* Must be a sophomore (credit hours at least 30, but no more than 60)
* State must be "MO", "KS, or "IA"

Commit message:

shift location of boolean expressions

04week/004.010_Boolean_Type_and_Expressions.md, after:

# 04.010 Boolean Type and Expressions

Boolean expressions have a value of true or false.

Unlike C/C++ integer data types may not be used as booleans

## Boolean literals

There are two literals for the boolean data type

* false
* true

Note that they are both lower case.

## Boolean constants

The Boolean data type is `boolean`.  

Many boolean identifiers start with "is" or "has." It is also common to stick 'OK' on the end of the name. It is usually a good idea that would make sense if the id is read as part of a sentence.

```java
int count = 0;
double x = 1.0;
boolean isYoung = true;
boolean hasWheels = false;
boolean oldEnough;
```

## Boolean Operators

The Boolean operators only work on numeric types

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
<|Less Than
<=|Less than or equal to
\>|Greater than
\>=|Greater than or equal to
==|Equal to
!=|Not equal to

! generally means "Not"

Random fact: In IT, ! is often called "bang" when it means something other than "not"

### English and operators

* "At least" usually means >= or <=
* "Thru" usually means <= or >=
* "Over" usually means >
* "Up to" usually means <
* more????

## Logical Operators

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
&&|and
\|\||or
!|not

&& has higher precedence than ||

Like C/C++, the single & and | are used are *Bitwise Operators* that we will not cover in this course.  They aren't hard, but they are mainly of interest in specialized fields of programming.
 

## Boolean variables

Boolean variables may hold values of `true` or `false`

Boolean variables may be on the left side of the assignment operator = as long as the expression to the right of the = is a boolean expression.

```java
boolean hasFever;
boolean lowFever;
boolean yes;
String answer;

hasFever = (temperature > 98.6)
lowFever = (temperature > 98.6 && temperature < 101.5)
yes = answer.startsWith("y") || answer.startsWith("Y")

```

Program example

```java
package chapter03;

import java.util.Scanner;

/**
 * Demonstrates using a boolean variable
 */
class LightsOn{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        int peopleHome = 0;
        boolean lightsOn = false;
        Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);
        
        System.out.print("How many people are home? ");
        peopleHome = input.nextInt();
        lightsOn = peopleHome > 0;
        System.out.println("Lights on: "+lightsOn);
    }
}
```

### DO NOT CODE LIKE THIS:

```java
if(peopleHome > 0)
   lightsOn = true;
else
   lightsOn = false;
```

Instead, do this:

```java
lightsOn = (peopleHome > 0);
```
In the above example, the parenthesis are not needed.  But it can help readability if boolean expressions are included in parenthesis.

Also, don't do this:

```java
if(lightsOn==true)
```

And finally, `!lightsOn` is better than `lightsOn==false`

The () are not needed, but they improve readability

## `if` statements

### Blocks of Code

A block of code is a series of lines of code that should be treated as a single statement

### if syntax

```text
if(boolean expression)
   single statement or block
```

```java
if(lightsOn){
    System.out.println("Lights are on");
}
```

## `if...else`

Like Python and C++

### elseif

Java does not have `elseif` or `elif`.  But you may use `else if`

#### Practical guidelines

* Indentation is not required by syntax, but do it anyway
* Technically the {} are not required for a single statement in the body, but use them anyway.
* Note that a boolean variable is technically a boolean expression
* Punctuation
    * Put the opening { on the same line as the if or else
    * Align the } and }else{ with the corresponding if statement
* Avoid complex boolean conditions
    * Use intermediate boolean variables
    * Use nested ifs instead of compound expressions
* If you have && and || in the same statement, then use parenthesis for clarity, even if they are not technically needed.

```java
import java.util.Scanner;

/**
 * Demonstrates nested if statements
 */
public class NestedIf {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        double temperature;
        Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);

        System.out.print("\nWhat is the temperature? ");
        temperature = input.nextDouble();
        System.out.print("\nIf the temperature is "+temperature+" I suggest that you ");

        if(temperature < 32.0){
            System.out.println("go ice skating.");
        }else if(temperature < 70.0){
            System.out.println("go hiking.");
        }else if(temperature < 85){
            System.out.println("go for a walk.");
        }else{
            System.out.println("go swimming.");
        }

        System.out.println("\nDone\n");
        input.close();
    }
}
```

## Ranges

boolean eligible = (age >= 18) && (age <= 35)

## Avoid == on real numbers

This is a very good Computerphile video on floating point numbers:

* [Computerphile video on floating point numbers](https://youtu.be/PZRI1IfStY0)

```java
boolean test = (1.1+1.1+1.1 == 3.3)
```

```java
final double EPSILON = 0.00001;
boolean test = Math.abs(1.1+1.1+1.1 - 3.3) < EPSILON;
```

## General warning

***Be very careful with logic***

* Avoid not except in simple and intuitive situations
* Avoid "reversing" the logic, especially on ranges 
    * DeMorgan's theorum is relevant, but beyond the scope of what we are talking about
* Try to keep logic as simple and intuitive as possible.  Make it simple in English, then code it that way.
* Avoid complex compound logic
  * Break components down into boolean variables if possible
  * Use nest if and chained if statements to simplify logic
* Use a lot of parenthesis to clarify precedence, even if they are not necessary


## Comparing Strings

The relational operators do not work with strings.

There are boolean functions in the String class that handle some common situations.

[https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html)

The main comparison method is the .compareTo() method, but we will cover that later.  For now we will try to make due with String methods.

## Class Problem

To qualify for a scholarship:

* Student age must be over 65 or 18 through 35
* GPA must be 3.5 or higher
* ACT score 22 or higher
* Must be a sophomore (credit hours at least 30, but no more than 60)
* State must be "MO", "KS, or "IA"
