# 04.020 Truth Tables

## and  &&

"If you wash the dishes AND clean your room I will give you $10.

Wash the Dishes|Clean your room| AND
:---:|:---:|:---:
False|False|  False (Gets Nothing)
False|True|  False (Gets Nothing)
True|False|  False (Gets Nothing)
True|True|   True (Gets $10)

### Same thing, using 0 for false and 1 for true

Wash the Dishes|Clean your room| AND
:---:|:---:|:---:
0|0|0
0|1|0
1|0|0
1|1|1

## or  ||

"If you wash the dishes OR clean your room I will give you $10.

Wash the Dishes|Clean your room| OR
:---:|:---:|:---:
False|False|  False (Gets Nothing)
False|True|   True (Gets $10)
True|False|   True (Gets $10)
True|True|   True (Gets $10)

### Same thing, using 0 for false and 1 for true

Wash the Dishes|Clean your room| OR
:---:|:---:|:---:
0|0|0
0|1|1
1|0|1
1|1|1

### Truth tables with more conditions

Traditionally truth tables count down in binary to avoid missing options.

The sequence for 8 would be

```text
000
001
010
011
100
101
110
111
```

Mathmatically,

* && is a lot like multiplication.
* || is a lot like addition

&& has higher precedence than ||.

"If you wash the dishes and clean your room or mow the yard, I will give you $10"

If `room`, `dishes`, and `lawn` are boolean variables, the expression will be

`get10dollars = room && dishes || lawn`

There is an && and an ||.  The && has higher priority.

We do not need parenthesis, but if we put in the default operator priority we would get

`get10dollars = (room && dishes) || lawn`

room|&& dishes | &vert;&vert;lawn| Gets $10?
:---:|:--:|:---:|:---:
0|  0 |0|***0***
0|  0 |1|***1***
0|  1 |0|***0***
0|  1 |1|***1***
1|  0 |0|***0***
1|  0 |1|***1***
1|  1 |0|***1***
1|  1 |1|***1***

Another way we might do this is to create a temporary variable to hold the two in-house chores. 

```
inHouseDone = room && dishes
get10dollars = inHouseDone || lawn
```

Sometimes this kind of intermediate variable is useful to simplify the final expression.
