# 01.020 Installing Required Required Software

# The Java jdk

## Supported Operating Systems

In this course I recommend use of Linux.  The second choice is Windows 10 (or 11). I will try to help people running Windows 10 or a recent version of Linux.  

It is definitely possible to use a Mac in this course, but the instructor probably will not be able to help you with problems.  So if you are using a Mac you should be an experienced technical Mac user or know someone who can help with technical issues.

I think it is possible to use a Chromebook for this course, but I can't guarantee it.  You will need to support it yourself or know an expert who can help you.

You probably cannot use a tablet or phone for this course.

## Assumptions

* You know how to install programs on the computer system you are using.
* You know how to use the terminal window or command line for your computer system.

## Java

### JDK vs JRE

* JRE is the *Java Runtime Environment.*  It is needed to execute programs that were written and compiled in Java or some other languages.  Most computers have the JRE installed.
* JDK is the *Java Development Kit.*  It is needed to compile Java programs.  Only Java programmers need to install the JDK.  

In this class we need to have both the JRE and JDK installed on our systems.  But in almost all cases installing the JDK will also get you the JRE.

### Distributions of Java

There are several distributions, but there are two main distributions

* Oracle's JDK
* OpenJDK

Java was developed by a company called Sun Microsystems.  They were very generous with Java licensing and consequently Java became very popular.  However, Sun Microsystems (and Java) are now owned by Oracle.  Oracles has been somewhat problematic with licensing and questionable attempts to retroactively apply licensing standards.  Technically Oracle has a good product, but it is not politically popular.

OpenJDK is an open source version of Java.  It tracks along very, very closely with the Oracle version.  

For this course and most practical purposes it does not matter which of those versions you use.

### Versions of Java

Java keeps getting new features and is evolving.  There are many versions.  Some versions of Java are designated "LTS" or "Long Term Support" versions.  Generally you should use an LTS version of Java whenever possible.

For this course I recommend Java 17 which is the LTS version.  You must be using *at least* Java 11 which is the previous LTS version.  If you are using anything older than 11 you should upgrade for this course.

#### Side note about the use of Java in industry

Many businesses that use Java basically "freeze" themselves on an old version of Java.  There are still a lot of businesses using Java 7.  Java 7 is still a very good programming language.  Most of the things done since Java 7 have made programming easier, but they have not substantially changed any of the main principles of software development that were used in the development of Java.  But don't be surprised if you go on a job interview and find they are using something like Java 7.  The motivations for using later versions of Java in this course have to do with the textbooks available and in print.  Publishers usually write books based on the current LTS versions of Java.  Therefore we need to use more recent books to keep up with the textbooks.

### Versions for this course

For CSC 254 you should be using either version 11 LTS or version 17 LTS.  Obviously 17 is the most recent.  Most Linux and Mac systems currently allow easy installation of version 11 of OpenJDK through their distribution repositories.  Version 17 is available, but it requires a more hands-on process to install it.

To find out if you have the Java JDK installed, open a command prompt or terminal and type the following commands.

```bash
java -version
java -version
```
If you get a statement like the following you can see what version is installed.  In my case I have OpenJDK version 11.0.11  installed.  You may have something other than OpenJDK, and your version will probably be different.  

```
java -version
openjdk version "17.0.3" 2022-04-19
OpenJDK Runtime Environment (build 17.0.3+7-Ubuntu-0ubuntu0.22.04.1)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM (build 17.0.3+7-Ubuntu-0ubuntu0.22.04.1, mixed mode, sharing)

javac -version
javac 17.0.3
```

If you do not have the Java jdk installed you will get whatever "Not Found" message your operating system delivers.

On Windows I think it is easier to install the Oracle JDK.  On Linux and Mac you may find it easier to install the OpenJDK

### Installing Java

* Oracle JDK: [https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/downloads/)
* Open JDK: [https://openjdk.java.net/install/](https://openjdk.java.net/install/)

#### Install Java on Windows

I think the easiest install is to do the Oracle JDK.  Go to the Downloads page and select the *x64 MSI Installer.*

#### Install OpenJDK on Ubuntu-based systems.  

You may install openJDK on Ubuntu based Linux systems by typing the following commands at the command prompt.

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install default-jdk
```

You can follow up with `java -version` and `javac -version` to confirm the jdk installed.
