chapter03/03.010_Boolean_Type_and_Expressions.md, before:

# 03.010 Boolean Type and Expressions

Boolean expressions have a value of true or false.

Unlike C/C++ integer data types may not be used as booleans

## Boolean Operators

The Boolean operators only work on numeric types

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
<|Less Than
<=|Less than or equal to
\>|Greater than
\>=|Greater than or equal to
==|Equal to
!=|Not equal to

! generally means "Not"

Random fact: In IT, ! is often called "bang" when it means something other than "not"

## Logical Operators

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
&&|and
\|\||or
!|not

&& has higher precedence than ||

Like C/C++, the single & and | are used are *Bitwise Operators* that we will not cover in this course.  They aren't hard, but they are mainly of interest in specialized fields of programming.
 

## Boolean variables

Boolean variables may hold values of `true` or `false`

Boolean variables may be on the left side of the assignment operator = as long as the expression to the right of the = is a boolean expression.

```java
boolean hasFever;
boolean lowFever;
boolean yes;
String answer;

hasFever = (temperature > 98.6)
lowFever = (temperature > 98.6 && temperature < 101.5)
yes = answer.startsWith("y") || answer.startsWith("Y")

```

Program example

```java
package chapter03;

import java.util.Scanner;

/**
 * Demonstrates using a boolean variable
 */
class LightsOn{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        int peopleHome = 0;
        boolean lightsOn = false;
        Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);
        
        System.out.print("How many people are home? ");
        peopleHome = input.nextInt();
        lightsOn = peopleHome > 0;
        System.out.println("Lights on: "+lightsOn);
    }
}
```

### DO NOT CODE LIKE THIS:

```java
if(peopleHome > 0)
   lightsOn = true;
else
   lightsOn = false;
```

Instead, do this:

```java
lightsOn = (peopleHome > 0);
```

Also, don't do this:

```java
if(lightsOn==true)
```

And finally, `!lightsOn` is better than `lightsOn==false`

The () are not needed, but they improve readability

## `if` statements

### Blocks of Code

A block of code is a series of lines of code that should be treated as a single statement

### if syntax

```text
if(boolean expression)
   single statement or block
```

```java
if(lightsOn){
    System.out.println("Lights are on");
}
```

## `if...else`

Like Python and C++

### elseif

Java does not have `elseif` or `elif`.  But you may use `else if`

#### Practical guidelines

* Indentation is not required by syntax, but do it anyway
* Technically the {} are not required for a single statement in the body, but use them anyway.
* Note that a boolean variable is technically a boolean expression
* Punctuation
    * Put the opening { on the same line as the if or else
    * Align the } and }else{ with the corresponding if statement
* Avoid complex boolean conditions
    * Use intermediate boolean variables
    * Use nested ifs instead of compound expressions
* If you have && and || in the same statement, then use parenthesis for clarity, even if they are not technically needed.

```java
import java.util.Scanner;

/**
 * Demonstrates nested if statements
 */
public class NestedIf {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        double temperature;
        Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);

        System.out.print("\nWhat is the temperature? ");
        temperature = input.nextDouble();
        System.out.print("\nIf the temperature is "+temperature+" I suggest that you ");

        if(temperature < 32.0){
            System.out.println("go ice skating.");
        }else if(temperature < 70.0){
            System.out.println("go hiking.");
        }else if(temperature < 85){
            System.out.println("go for a walk.");
        }else{
            System.out.println("go swimming.");
        }

        System.out.println("\nDone\n");
        input.close();
    }
}
```

## Ranges

boolean eligible = (age >= 18) && (age <= 35)

## Avoid == on real numbers

```java
boolean test = (1.1+1.1+1.1 == 3.3)
```

```java
final double EPSILON = 0.00001;
boolean test = Math.abs(1.1+1.1+1.1 - 3.3) < EPSILON;
```

## Comparing Strings

The relational operators do not work with strings.

There are boolean functions in the String class that handle some common situations.

[https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html)

The main comparison method is the .compareTo() method, but we will cover that later.  For now we will try to make due with String methods.

## Class Problem

To qualify for a scholarship:

* Student age must be over 65 or 18 through 35
* GPA must be 3.5 or higher
* ACT score 22 or higher
* Must be a sophomore (credit hours at least 30, but no more than 60)
* State must be "MO", "KS, or "IA"

Commit message:

add link to computerphile video on floating point

chapter03/03.010_Boolean_Type_and_Expressions.md, after:

# 03.010 Boolean Type and Expressions

Boolean expressions have a value of true or false.

Unlike C/C++ integer data types may not be used as booleans

## Boolean Operators

The Boolean operators only work on numeric types

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
<|Less Than
<=|Less than or equal to
\>|Greater than
\>=|Greater than or equal to
==|Equal to
!=|Not equal to

! generally means "Not"

Random fact: In IT, ! is often called "bang" when it means something other than "not"

## Logical Operators

Operator|Meaning
:---:|:---
&&|and
\|\||or
!|not

&& has higher precedence than ||

Like C/C++, the single & and | are used are *Bitwise Operators* that we will not cover in this course.  They aren't hard, but they are mainly of interest in specialized fields of programming.
 

## Boolean variables

Boolean variables may hold values of `true` or `false`

Boolean variables may be on the left side of the assignment operator = as long as the expression to the right of the = is a boolean expression.

```java
boolean hasFever;
boolean lowFever;
boolean yes;
String answer;

hasFever = (temperature > 98.6)
lowFever = (temperature > 98.6 && temperature < 101.5)
yes = answer.startsWith("y") || answer.startsWith("Y")

```

Program example

```java
package chapter03;

import java.util.Scanner;

/**
 * Demonstrates using a boolean variable
 */
class LightsOn{
    public static void main(String[] args){
        int peopleHome = 0;
        boolean lightsOn = false;
        Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);
        
        System.out.print("How many people are home? ");
        peopleHome = input.nextInt();
        lightsOn = peopleHome > 0;
        System.out.println("Lights on: "+lightsOn);
    }
}
```

### DO NOT CODE LIKE THIS:

```java
if(peopleHome > 0)
   lightsOn = true;
else
   lightsOn = false;
```

Instead, do this:

```java
lightsOn = (peopleHome > 0);
```

Also, don't do this:

```java
if(lightsOn==true)
```

And finally, `!lightsOn` is better than `lightsOn==false`

The () are not needed, but they improve readability

## `if` statements

### Blocks of Code

A block of code is a series of lines of code that should be treated as a single statement

### if syntax

```text
if(boolean expression)
   single statement or block
```

```java
if(lightsOn){
    System.out.println("Lights are on");
}
```

## `if...else`

Like Python and C++

### elseif

Java does not have `elseif` or `elif`.  But you may use `else if`

#### Practical guidelines

* Indentation is not required by syntax, but do it anyway
* Technically the {} are not required for a single statement in the body, but use them anyway.
* Note that a boolean variable is technically a boolean expression
* Punctuation
    * Put the opening { on the same line as the if or else
    * Align the } and }else{ with the corresponding if statement
* Avoid complex boolean conditions
    * Use intermediate boolean variables
    * Use nested ifs instead of compound expressions
* If you have && and || in the same statement, then use parenthesis for clarity, even if they are not technically needed.

```java
import java.util.Scanner;

/**
 * Demonstrates nested if statements
 */
public class NestedIf {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        double temperature;
        Scanner input = new Scanner(System.in);

        System.out.print("\nWhat is the temperature? ");
        temperature = input.nextDouble();
        System.out.print("\nIf the temperature is "+temperature+" I suggest that you ");

        if(temperature < 32.0){
            System.out.println("go ice skating.");
        }else if(temperature < 70.0){
            System.out.println("go hiking.");
        }else if(temperature < 85){
            System.out.println("go for a walk.");
        }else{
            System.out.println("go swimming.");
        }

        System.out.println("\nDone\n");
        input.close();
    }
}
```

## Ranges

boolean eligible = (age >= 18) && (age <= 35)

## Avoid == on real numbers

This is a very good Computerphile video on floating point numbers:

* [Computerphile video on floating point numbers](https://youtu.be/PZRI1IfStY0)

```java
boolean test = (1.1+1.1+1.1 == 3.3)
```

```java
final double EPSILON = 0.00001;
boolean test = Math.abs(1.1+1.1+1.1 - 3.3) < EPSILON;
```

## Comparing Strings

The relational operators do not work with strings.

There are boolean functions in the String class that handle some common situations.

[https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/String.html)

The main comparison method is the .compareTo() method, but we will cover that later.  For now we will try to make due with String methods.

## Class Problem

To qualify for a scholarship:

* Student age must be over 65 or 18 through 35
* GPA must be 3.5 or higher
* ACT score 22 or higher
* Must be a sophomore (credit hours at least 30, but no more than 60)
* State must be "MO", "KS, or "IA"
