# Chapter 00.010 Course Overview

## Java vs Python

### Python

* Great for small projects
* There isn't much "syntax overhead" to get a program started.
* Python is an interpreted language (mostly)
* Pascal has become the [*Lingua Franca*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lingua_franca) of programming
* Allows undeclared variables and is weakly typed.  This makes programming easy, but also **very dangerous.**
* Python encourages structuring logic, but it has somewhat limited ability to structure data.
* Python programs are often single files.  


### Java

* Java is better for large and very large projects.
* Java is a compiled language (mostly).
* Variables must be declared before use.  It is strongly typed.  This can increase annoyance for novice programmers, but it makes large projects both safer and easier.
* Java is an Object Oriented language.  This means it has tools that allow very structured and organized data.
* Large Java programs contain many files organized into projects

#### Instructors opinions about Java

Java is a good language, but it missed the opportunity to be a great language.

* The original design put too much emphasis on following C and C++ syntax
* Limitations to Object Models
* No built-in project structure
* Many missing features that have been added incrementally over time.  The first version could not even read from the keyboard.
* Licensing Issues due to Oracle controlling official Java

## Interpreted vs Compiled languages

### Interpreted languages

Most "scripting languages" are interpreted.  The program is compiled from the [source code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Source_Code) in the  programming language to [machine code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Machine_code) every time the program is executed.

Programs are exchanged by exchanging the original source code.

### Compiled languages

The source code is compiled into machine code, and the machine code is saved in a file.  The machine code file is what is executed.  The source code file does not need to be present.  

The file that contains the machine code is called an "object file."  In Java, the object file has the extension ```.class```.

Programs may be exchanged by exchanging the object file.  The programs may also be exchanged by exchanging the source code, project files, and any required resource files (like files containing graphics)

### Hybrid

Most modern languages are not purely interpreted or compiled.  For example, in Java, the source code file is compiled into a .class file which is a "generic machine code" that must be interpreted.  This is one thing that makes Java very portable.