# 00.020 Required Software to Install

## Supported Operating Systems

In this course I recommend use of Linux.  The second choice is Windows 10 (or 11). I will try to help people running Windows 10 or a recent version of Linux.  

It is definitely possible to use a Mac in this course, but the instructor probably will not be able to help you with problems.  So if you are using a Mac you should be an experienced technical Mac user or know someone who can help with technical issues.

I think it is possible to use a Chromebook for this course, but I can't guarantee it.  You will need to support it yourself or know an expert who can help you.

You probably cannot use a tablet or phone for this course.

## Assumptions

* You know how to install programs on the computer system you are using.
* You know how to use the terminal window or command line for your computer system.

## Java

In this course we need to install a "Java Development Kit" or JDK.  You should have at least version 11 installed.  Before installing a JDK, I suggest that you see if you have Java installed.  Open a terminal window and type the following command at the command line:

```bash
java --version
```
If you get a statement like the following you can see what version is installed.  In my case I have OpenJDK version 11.0.11  installed.  You may have something other than OpenJDK, and your version will probably be different.  

```
java --version
openjdk 11.0.11 2021-04-20
OpenJDK Runtime Environment (build 11.0.11+9-Ubuntu-0ubuntu2)
OpenJDK 64-Bit Server VM (build 11.0.11+9-Ubuntu-0ubuntu2, mixed mode, sharing)
```

If you do not have the Java jdk installed you will get whatever "Not Found" message your operating system delivers.

### OpenJDK vs Oracle JDK, and versions

There are two main forms of Java that will work for this course.  You may either use the OpenJDK or Oracle's JDK.

Honestly, I think the Oracle version is easier to install on Windows.  But it can run into licensing issues.  I will be using openJDK in class, but you may use either.

I will be using version 11 in class.  You may notice that it is not the latest version.  There are multiple reasons for using 11, including the textbook we are using for class.  The 11 version is popular in industry as well.

### Installing OpenJDK

#### Install OpenJDK on Ubuntu-based systems.  

You may install openJDK on Ubuntu based Linux systems by typing the following commands at the command prompt.

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install default-jdk
```

You can follow up with ```java --version``` to confirm the jdk installed.

#### Install OpenJDK on other systems


For Windows you may go to https://jdk.java.net/java-se-ri/11 and download the .zip file.  Follow the instructions to install the zip file and make sure that Java is added to your path.

### Installing Oracle JDK on Windows, Mac, and Linux

Visit https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/install/overview-jdk-installation.html#GUID-8677A77F-231A-40F7-98B9-1FD0B48C346A and follow the instructions.